---
layout: with-comments
title: Architects anc Computer Science and Sealing Wax
---

Any student in a Computer Science-y program has undoubtably heard their goal
described as "a degree in computers". Now, this doesn't bother me as much as
many others, but it is still a gross oversimplication. That is not my topic
today, though.

The more sophisticated outsider will believe that our degree is in programming.
And who can blame them? We certainly spend enough time doing it, yet we are
still not quite at the truth. It may help to look at a similar, yet different,
field.

Architecture students spend a vast amount of their time modelling, whether using
computers or physical materials. An observer might think that this is what they
went to school to learn. But it is actually much more - they learn how to design
buildings, and merely use models to describe what they've created in their
minds.

For us it is much the same. We design applications to perform some task, and use
programming to transform our thoughts into something a bit more tangible (albeit
still not physical). We spend much time programming because we design many
things that need to be programmed. We take a few courses on the actual art of
programming so that we can spend more time designing and less time getting the
computer to see our design the same way as we do, just as architecture majors
receive instruction in AutoCAD, not to become modellers, but to get more time to
create ideas.

That is, after all, what we really deal in - ideas. Ideas so crazy that there's
no possible way to manifest them in the physical world.

We are working towards a degree in professional dreaming.
