---
layout: with-comments
title: Why I Don't Use Text Messaging
---

That's right - I am a 21-year old Software Engineering major who doesn't use
text messaging. Not only that, but it's disabled entirely on my phone, so I
don't receive texts either.

Why, you ask? Having anticipated your potential question and bated you into
asking it, I have kindly provided answers below.

# [Your whole feces lights up when she's in the room](http://damnyouautocorrect.com/4369/new-girlfriend/)

I have a flip-phone. You know, those things that were pretty standard back in
2007, when I got it? Typing letters on a numeric keypad is, well, painful. Even
touchscreen virtual keyboards aren't that great. I'm holding out for a phone
with a qwerty hardware keyboard.

# [Do one thing and do it well](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_philosophy)

Phones make and receive phone calls. Computers browse the web, play games, take
pictures, play music, and find directions. I have a phone - you have a portable
computer. Recognize that, although they share superficial similarities, they are
quite different devices.

# [Alright, poop coming out](http://www.penny-arcade.com/comic/2008/4/23/)

In this day and age, people tend to be much more connected to each other than
previously. Sure, it leads to increased [dorama] among teens. Yes, there are
people who break up via text message. What really bothers me, though, is that
people tend to not ever really **be** anywhere.

Just take a stroll around town, particularly a college town like SLO. 8 people
at dinner, 3 with their heads in their phones. 30 students in a class, 12
browsing Facebook.

As easily-distracted as I am, I need as much help as I can get paying attention.
One of my goals is to fill everyone with the assurance that if they're talking
to me, I'm listening; texting will only be yet another thing for me to fight.

[dorama]: http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=dorama&defid=1941883

# [Because that leads to fully-formed ideas](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=putQn89TQzc)

As a method of communication becomes easier, the overall quality of messages
sent tends to drop. If someone writes you a letter (like, on paper, and sent
through the non-electronic mailing system), they probably took some time to do
so. Emails are a lot less formal, but still often have sentences and paragraphs.
By the time we progress down through mailing lists and forums to Twitter,
Facebook statuses, instant messaging, text messaging, and IRC, the mean quality
of ideas being communicated is low enough to despair anyone concerned with the
future of the human race.

Now, don't get me wrong - I have a Google Talk account, and you can frequently
find me on the Freenode and Rizon IRC networks. It's just that the latter, in
particular, fulfills my need for brain-dead thought-vomiting - no need to share
any of that with people with whom I can have *actual* conversations.

Now, am I just a grumpy prematurely-old man? Probably.
