---
layout: with-comments
title: The Myth of the Informed Consumer
---

One of the primary problems of unregulated capitalism (that is, of the
libertarian variety[\[1\]](#note1)) is the assumption of a perfectly-informed
consumer.  We do not need regulatory laws, we say, because the market will
regulate itself.  If a merchant sells shoddy products, he will soon find
himself out of business from a lack of customers.

While the assumption an unhappy customer will advertise their experience to
their friends is a reasonble one, we tend to equate it with a similar, yet
distinct, hypothesis: the number of unhappy customers and their friends will
grow so rapidly as to soon form the majority of all potential customers.

What often happens in this global economy is the successful existence of a
crappy company due primarily to its wide audience and small throughput.  Many
of its customers may leave dissatisfied, but it's of no concern to the company
- there are plenty more to replace them.

The tool we've created to combat this is the online marketplace.  Not only does
Amazon display user ratings of products, but the people selling them.  (Ebay,
Etsy, etc. perform similar roles.)  We've even incorporated this into local (as
opposed to global) business, through Yelp.  Now when we buy, we buy with
confidence we're getting the best deal.

This system has its flaws, of course.  There is the ever-present danger of
falsified ratings.  Users may make a mistake, or be unqualified to rate an
item's quality.  And, one of my personal worst worries, all users may rate a
product highly only to find it doesn't live up to its expected lifetime - but
by then, ratings are useless, as thousands have already been purchased, and it
has been phased out of production in favor of a newer design.

But there is an even greater problem, one that is far more systemic.  As E. F.
Schumacher points out early in *Small is Beautiful*,

> Economics deals with goods and services from the point of view of the market,
> where willing buyer meets willing seller.  The buyer is essentially a bargain
> hunter; he is not concerned with the origin of the goods or the conditions
> under which they have been produced.  His sole concern is to obtain the best
> value for his money.

Here we run into the problem of the uninformed consumer yet again.  If I am
interested in not supporting slave labor, how am I to execute this wish in my
daily life?  I can't ask many of the merchants I interact with, and those I
*can* have no better clue than I, for they are almost as removed.  We have no
clear picture available to us of a product's life prior to the shelf, and who
involved in that chain would like to illuminate the matter?

We do see companies provide some information, but it's certain the market
advantage is a considered part of the decision.  When Chipotle advertises its
open-range pork, what information don't we know?  When Apple advertises its
products' EPEAT Gold status, how many consumers realize they're purchasing
devices with planned obsolescence that fuel wars in central Africa?

At iFixit, we're friends with the folks at [Patagonia].  Recently a Patagonia
employee came to tell us about [their quest for transparency in their product
lines][corp-responsibility].  While it's absolutely awesome they're doing this,
they faced enormous challenges, resulting in much more control over the supply
chain than they perhaps would've liked.  And even with Patagonia, we have to
place trust not only in the company's desire to tell the truth, but their
ability to see the whole situation and to correclty judge the reports of all
*their* suppliers.

In short, while we've created a good enough system for judging products on a
purely-economic basis, we're absolutely ill-equipped to make purchasing
decicions based on any broader criteria.

I believe technology can provide a solution.  Just as Amazon and Yelp have
helped small businesses to compete with the mega-corporations on values of
quality and service, so is there an answer to this supra-economic information
scarcity.  After all, technology has been responsible for many great forward
leaps in information exchange, from the printing press to the World Wide Web.

I don't know what this solution is.  I don't know what it will look like.  I
only know that it will come, and it will empower our values to change the world
we live in.

[Patagonia]: http://www.patagonia.com/us/home
[corp-responsibility]: http://www.patagonia.com/us/patagonia.go?assetid=67372

----

<a name="note1"></a>
\[1\]: The reader may recall that I self-identify as a libertarian.

