---
layout: with-comments
title: On the Freedom of Data
---

*This post is part of Mothball March, where I dust off old posts I never quite
finished.  This is a more-final version of something I originally wrote in
December 2012.*

In the 1980s, a young computer programmer named Richard Stallman started the
Free Software Foundation with the goal of promoting "free software", software
that granted its users a number of rights, including the right to view the
source code, determine how the program works, and use that method in any other
software.  RMS realized that without these rights, we didn't truly own any of
our software or, more importantly, our data - if the company manufacturing,
say, your word processor went out of business, you could be stuck with a number
of important business documents that you could no longer read.  Over the last
30 years, we've made significant progress in convincing the technical community
of this, and inroads are happening to non-technical folks as well.  However,
we now face a new fight.

Previously having the freedom to deconstruct a piece of software (that is, to
obtain the algorithm used to read data) was all that was needed, since you
always had access to your own data.  Now, with cloud-based services, that is
often not the case.

Take Facebook as an example.  Many people upload most, if not all, the photos
they take directly to Facebook - and that's where they continue to live.  If
Facebook decides to, say, start charging you (or any of your friends) $20 to
view your photos, you can be outraged, you can throw a fit - but you'll have to
either pay the fee or give up those memories.  This is a fairly far-fetched
idea (although not as much as you might think), but any number of other issues
could happen - Facebook could suddenly go out of business, or suffer
catastrophic data loss, or even just slowly fade into obscurity without ever
providing an easy way for you to retrieve your data.

In today's networked world, free data is just as important as free software, if
not more.

A previous (great!) company I worked for, XYZ Homework, provided an online
homework service for customers of its books.  The system we used was built on
an open-source system, but if you wanted to switch off, you'd lose students'
accounts, progress on problems, the problems themselves (both you-created and
XYZ-provided).

As a contrast, Github's primary website is not open-source, but I have
absolutely no concerns about it.  Much of it is inherently open and
distributable (the decentralized nature of git means that everyone working on a
project has a full copy of it, including history), but those parts that aren't,
they provide access to with a well-documented and freely-available API.  If
you're concerned about losing access to, say, your bug reports, you can easily
back them up on a regular basis, and a number of people have developed
open-source adapters that will convert between Github's issue tracking system
and popular alternatives.

If you're a developer, *please* provide a way for your users to export their
data into a competing service; if lock-in is the only thing keeping them with
you, you're doomed already.

And since all of us are users of something-or-the-other, it's our responsiblity
to give data freedom a place in the purchasing conversation - and, if
necessary, to make businesses pay attention by refusing to use their services
until they free our data.

