---
layout: with-comments
title: "Sheet Music: Documentation for Musicians"
---

Musicians of all sorts are constantly practicing to improve their ability to
manifest the music in their heads into the instruments they play.  Where there
is a large split is in how that music gets into their heads in the first place.

Some people are very good at playing by ear - they hear a song, know where
those notes lay on their instrument, and can reproduce it fairly easily.  This
gives them a lot of freedom, for if they're familiar with a song, they can play
it without much practice or preparation, which is great at parties!

On the other end of the spectrum are the excellent sight-readers, who can play
any piece from sheet music.  A good sight-reader can play a song whether or not
they've heard it before; before radios and recorded music became commonplace,
this was often how music was spread.  A reliance upon sheet music is both an
advantage and disadvantage, for while a sight-reader without any music is
infinitely less capable than their fellow ear-trained musician, they are
limited in the music they play only by the size of their library, rather than
the extent of their memory.

In this way, sheet music is documentation, just as much as software docs - it
frees up your memory from storing how to play (use) a song (a tool) that you
haven't touched in months or years, and also helps introduce a new musician
(user) to it.

Sheet music has an additional benefit when learning new songs.  Frequently,
sheet music will have additional notations specifying fingering and sticking;
while a musician learning by ear can certainly learn how to make the same
sounds, they may find out much later that [what they thought was so complicated
is really quite simple][paradiddles] when playing it the way the author
intended.  Sound like any software experiences you've had?

Of course, most professional musicians will strive to be good at *both*
sight-reading and playing by ear.  Although there's no direct parallel to
software for playing by ear, it's important to keep in mind that we have two
parts to take care of as well - intuitive design that works well without
training, and good documentation to fall back on for advanced usage.

[paradiddles]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YDsqUxhzb7Q

